README.md, before:

# GMI Validator

A web-based validation tool for **GMI**, **SOSI**, and **KOF** files used in Norwegian water and wastewater (VA) infrastructure. It helps municipal engineers and contractors verify as-built data before import into VA databases.

**Live app:** Hosted on [Vercel](https://vercel.com)

---

## What It Does

Upload a file and the app instantly parses, validates, and visualises the data — all in the browser.

| Capability               | Description                                                                                                                   |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Multi-format parsing** | GMI, SOSI (via [sosijs](https://github.com/nicwaller/sosijs)), and KOF survey files                                           |
| **Field validation**     | Checks required fields, acceptable values, and custom domain rules for points and lines                                       |
| **Incline analysis**     | Detects backfall, flat pipes, and low incline on gravity sewer lines                                                          |
| **Z-value validation**   | Flags missing or zero Z coordinates across all geometry                                                                       |
| **Terrain comparison**   | Fetches ground elevation from [Geonorge Høydedata API](https://ws.geonorge.no/hoydedata/v1/) and compares against pipe depths |
| **Topplokk check**       | Verifies that manholes (KUM, SLU, SLS, SAN) have a matching lid (LOK)                                                         |
| **Outlier detection**    | Statistical identification of objects far from the main data cluster                                                          |
| **2D map**               | Interactive Leaflet map with layer management, WMS overlay support, and legend                                                |
| **3D viewer**            | Three.js-based pipe network visualisation with terrain context                                                                |
| **Multi-layer**          | Load multiple files simultaneously and compare layers side-by-side                                                            |

The entire UI is in **Norwegian (bokmål)**.

---

## Tech Stack

|                           |                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Framework**             | [Next.js 16](https://nextjs.org) with React 19 and the React Compiler                                                                |
| **Styling**               | [Tailwind CSS 4](https://tailwindcss.com)                                                                                            |
| **State**                 | [Zustand](https://zustand-demo.pmnd.rs/) — single store with logical slices                                                          |
| **Map**                   | [Leaflet](https://leafletjs.com) / [React Leaflet](https://react-leaflet.js.org)                                                     |
| **3D**                    | [Three.js](https://threejs.org) via [React Three Fiber](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber) & [Drei](https://drei.docs.pmnd.rs/) |
| **Coordinate transforms** | [proj4js](http://proj4js.org/)                                                                                                       |
| **Virtualised tables**    | [TanStack Table](https://tanstack.com/table) + [TanStack Virtual](https://tanstack.com/virtual)                                      |
| **Hosting**               | [Vercel](https://vercel.com)                                                                                                         |
| **Analytics**             | [Vercel Analytics](https://vercel.com/analytics) (anonymous, cookie-free)                                                            |

---

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── app/                  # Next.js App Router (pages, API routes)
│   └── api/
│       ├── track/        # Anonymous usage tracking endpoint
│       └── wms-proxy/    # Server-side WMS proxy to avoid CORS
├── components/           # UI components (Sidebar, MapView, FileUpload, 3D/, …)
├── data/                 # Validation rules (JSON) & reference documents
│   └── rules/            # Point/line field rules + custom logic
├── features/             # Feature modules (user-tracking docs & SQL)
└── lib/
    ├── parsing/          # Parsers: gmiParser, sosiParser, kofParser
    ├── validation/       # Rule engine (validator, fieldValidation)
    ├── analysis/         # incline, zValidation, terrain, outliers, topplok
    ├── tracking/         # Kommune lookup, Supabase client, geo helpers
    ├── 3d/               # Data transforms & colour mapping for 3D view
    └── store.js          # Zustand global store
```

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** ≥ 18
- **npm** (or your preferred package manager)

### Install & Run

```bash
git clone https://github.com/<your-org>/gmi-validering.git
cd gmi-validering
npm install
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### Environment Variables (optional)

| Variable                    | Purpose                                 |
| --------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `SUPABASE_URL`              | Supabase project URL for usage tracking |
| `SUPABASE_SERVICE_ROLE_KEY` | Supabase service role key               |

The app works fully without these — tracking is simply skipped.

---

## Security & Privacy

This application was designed with a **privacy-first** approach:

- **No file data leaves the browser.** All parsing, validation, and analysis runs entirely client-side. Uploaded files are never sent to or stored on the server.
- **No personal data is collected.** There are no user accounts, cookies, or tracking pixels.
- **Minimal anonymous usage tracking.** The only data persisted server-side is the **kommune** (municipality) where the uploaded data originates, derived from the coordinates in the file via the [Geonorge API](https://ws.geonorge.no/). This is stored as an aggregate counter (municipality + date) in Supabase and is used solely to understand geographic adoption. No IP addresses, filenames, or file contents are stored.
- **WMS proxy is stateless.** The server-side WMS proxy forwards map tile requests without caching or logging credentials.
- **SSRF protection.** The WMS proxy validates target URLs and restricts protocols to HTTP/HTTPS.

---

## Development

This project has been developed iteratively with the assistance of **GitHub Copilot** (AI pair-programming). Developer-facing notes are in [docs/DEVELOPER_NOTES.md](docs/DEVELOPER_NOTES.md), and historic Copilot prompts/specs/reviews are archived under [docs/archive/](docs/archive/).

### Key Design Decisions

- **Client-side processing** — keeps infrastructure costs minimal and avoids handling sensitive data on the server.
- **Zustand over Redux/Context** — chosen for small bundle size, selective subscriptions, and simplicity.
- **React Compiler** — enabled via Next.js 16 for automatic memoisation.
- **Rule-driven validation** — field rules are defined in JSON (`src/data/rules/`) making them easy to update without code changes.
- **Norwegian UI / English codebase** — all user-facing text is in Norwegian bokmål; all code, comments, and documentation are in English.

### Scripts

| Command         | Action                   |
| --------------- | ------------------------ |
| `npm run dev`   | Start development server |
| `npm run build` | Production build         |
| `npm run start` | Serve production build   |
| `npm run lint`  | Run ESLint               |

---

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) — Copyright © 2025 Paul Bennett

Commit message:

feat(tracking): record both uploader + dataset locations; update schema, RPC, storage, and docs

README.md, after:

# GMI Validator

A web-based validation tool for **GMI**, **SOSI**, and **KOF** files used in Norwegian water and wastewater (VA) infrastructure. It helps municipal engineers and contractors verify as-built data before import into VA databases.

**Live app:** Hosted on [Vercel](https://vercel.com)

---

## What It Does

Upload a file and the app instantly parses, validates, and visualises the data — all in the browser.

| Capability               | Description                                                                                                                   |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Multi-format parsing** | GMI, SOSI (via [sosijs](https://github.com/nicwaller/sosijs)), and KOF survey files                                           |
| **Field validation**     | Checks required fields, acceptable values, and custom domain rules for points and lines                                       |
| **Incline analysis**     | Detects backfall, flat pipes, and low incline on gravity sewer lines                                                          |
| **Z-value validation**   | Flags missing or zero Z coordinates across all geometry                                                                       |
| **Terrain comparison**   | Fetches ground elevation from [Geonorge Høydedata API](https://ws.geonorge.no/hoydedata/v1/) and compares against pipe depths |
| **Topplokk check**       | Verifies that manholes (KUM, SLU, SLS, SAN) have a matching lid (LOK)                                                         |
| **Outlier detection**    | Statistical identification of objects far from the main data cluster                                                          |
| **2D map**               | Interactive Leaflet map with layer management, WMS overlay support, and legend                                                |
| **3D viewer**            | Three.js-based pipe network visualisation with terrain context                                                                |
| **Multi-layer**          | Load multiple files simultaneously and compare layers side-by-side                                                            |

The entire UI is in **Norwegian (bokmål)**.

---

## Tech Stack

|                           |                                                                                                                                      |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Framework**             | [Next.js 16](https://nextjs.org) with React 19 and the React Compiler                                                                |
| **Styling**               | [Tailwind CSS 4](https://tailwindcss.com)                                                                                            |
| **State**                 | [Zustand](https://zustand-demo.pmnd.rs/) — single store with logical slices                                                          |
| **Map**                   | [Leaflet](https://leafletjs.com) / [React Leaflet](https://react-leaflet.js.org)                                                     |
| **3D**                    | [Three.js](https://threejs.org) via [React Three Fiber](https://docs.pmnd.rs/react-three-fiber) & [Drei](https://drei.docs.pmnd.rs/) |
| **Coordinate transforms** | [proj4js](http://proj4js.org/)                                                                                                       |
| **Virtualised tables**    | [TanStack Table](https://tanstack.com/table) + [TanStack Virtual](https://tanstack.com/virtual)                                      |
| **Hosting**               | [Vercel](https://vercel.com)                                                                                                         |
| **Analytics**             | [Vercel Analytics](https://vercel.com/analytics) (anonymous, cookie-free)                                                            |

---

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── app/                  # Next.js App Router (pages, API routes)
│   └── api/
│       ├── track/        # Anonymous usage tracking endpoint
│       └── wms-proxy/    # Server-side WMS proxy to avoid CORS
├── components/           # UI components (Sidebar, MapView, FileUpload, 3D/, …)
├── data/                 # Validation rules (JSON) & reference documents
│   └── rules/            # Point/line field rules + custom logic
├── features/             # Feature modules (user-tracking docs & SQL)
└── lib/
    ├── parsing/          # Parsers: gmiParser, sosiParser, kofParser
    ├── validation/       # Rule engine (validator, fieldValidation)
    ├── analysis/         # incline, zValidation, terrain, outliers, topplok
    ├── tracking/         # Kommune lookup, Supabase client, geo helpers
    ├── 3d/               # Data transforms & colour mapping for 3D view
    └── store.js          # Zustand global store
```

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** ≥ 18
- **npm** (or your preferred package manager)

### Install & Run

```bash
git clone https://github.com/<your-org>/gmi-validering.git
cd gmi-validering
npm install
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### Environment Variables (optional)

| Variable                    | Purpose                                 |
| --------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `SUPABASE_URL`              | Supabase project URL for usage tracking |
| `SUPABASE_SERVICE_ROLE_KEY` | Supabase service role key               |

The app works fully without these — tracking is simply skipped.

---

## Security & Privacy

This application was designed with a **privacy-first** approach:

- **No file data leaves the browser.** All parsing, validation, and analysis runs entirely client-side. Uploaded files are never sent to or stored on the server.
- **No personal data is collected.** There are no user accounts, cookies, or tracking pixels.
- **Minimal anonymous usage tracking.** The only data persisted server-side is aggregated **location** data for both (1) the dataset kommune (derived from file coordinates via the [Geonorge API](https://ws.geonorge.no/)) and (2) the uploader’s rough location (from request geo). This is stored as aggregate counters in Supabase and is used solely to understand geographic adoption. No IP addresses, filenames, or file contents are stored.
- **WMS proxy is stateless.** The server-side WMS proxy forwards map tile requests without caching or logging credentials.
- **SSRF protection.** The WMS proxy validates target URLs and restricts protocols to HTTP/HTTPS.

---

## Development

This project has been developed iteratively with the assistance of **GitHub Copilot** (AI pair-programming). Developer-facing notes are in [docs/DEVELOPER_NOTES.md](docs/DEVELOPER_NOTES.md), and historic Copilot prompts/specs/reviews are archived under [docs/archive/](docs/archive/).

### Key Design Decisions

- **Client-side processing** — keeps infrastructure costs minimal and avoids handling sensitive data on the server.
- **Zustand over Redux/Context** — chosen for small bundle size, selective subscriptions, and simplicity.
- **React Compiler** — enabled via Next.js 16 for automatic memoisation.
- **Rule-driven validation** — field rules are defined in JSON (`src/data/rules/`) making them easy to update without code changes.
- **Norwegian UI / English codebase** — all user-facing text is in Norwegian bokmål; all code, comments, and documentation are in English.

### Scripts

| Command         | Action                   |
| --------------- | ------------------------ |
| `npm run dev`   | Start development server |
| `npm run build` | Production build         |
| `npm run start` | Serve production build   |
| `npm run lint`  | Run ESLint               |

---

## License

[MIT](LICENSE) — Copyright © 2025 Paul Bennett
